---
layout: page
title: Projects
order: 2
---

I consider *projects* to be reasonably large works that involve lots of
different components and a few weeks or months of concentrated effort and
willpower to complete. Small toy programs that only take a day or two would be
mentioned in my blog, but not here.

## neche (2022)
This project evolved small neural networks to play checkers. Networks were given
32 "sensory neurons" – to look at the different individual squares on the board
– as well as some inner neurons. They output a single evaluation score, which
a minimax algorithm (with alpha-beta pruning) used to explore future variations.

A "population" of several hundred networks would play a tournament-ish format
against itself each generation; the more successful networks that won more games
were more likely to become parents to the offspring in the next generation of
the population.

Network structure was encoded in a genome, where each 16-base pair gene encoded
a single synapse from one neuron to another. To create offspring, crossing-over
was simulated between the two parent genomes, and translocation and point
mutations were induced.

![]({{site.baseurl}}assets/nechenets.png)
*A variety of different networks generated by evolution with different
parameters*

![]({{site.baseurl}}assets/elo.png)
*The networks' self-play Elo over generations. On my laptop, it was unable to
escape the plateau after a quick initial jump. Higher mutation rates meant more
volatile Elo from generation to generation.*

This project was built using Rust, as well as the `rayon` crate to run each
generational tournament in parallel. All evolution, tree search, and move
move generation features were implemented from scratch.


## CHS Math Bowl (2020)
Developed for Collierville High School's annual Math Bowl, it featured
scoreboard and timers for each competition room, as well as an admin console
that controlled starting & stopping rounds, handling disputes, etc. In the
auditorium, a unified scoreboard and leaderboard showed the standings of all
teams, and live-updating scores as the rounds progressed.


*The admin console on the laptop screen, and the auditorium scoreboard displayed
on the projector in the background.*

![]({{site.baseurl}}assets/room2.jpeg)
*The scoreboard and timer for one of the individual rooms, during a preliminary
round.*

![]({{site.baseurl}}assets/semi.jpeg)
*The final score displayed during a semifinal round in the main auditorium.*

![]({{site.baseurl}}assets/setup.jpeg)
*A closer look at the admin console, here queuing up matches from the bracket
for each of the individual rooms. A green dot meant the room had completed the
round; yellow meant the round was still in progress.*

This project was developed completely from scratch in HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
using Google Firebase. In hindsight, probably React should've been used, as the
code is quite rushed and messy. But it worked great, almost flawlessly for the
entirety of the tournament. There was a slight bug where a score somehow was
submitted twice, but it was trivial to remove it in the admin console.